1. Introduction

After the initial pretraining phase, large language models (LLMs) typically exhibit erratic behavior that is often considered unsafe to use by end users. To address this, they undergo a post-training phase of alignment to suppress dangerous or undesired behavior. Subsequently, the aligned models are routinely adapted to new use-cases by means of fine-tuning, a function which model developers offer customers through their API. However, recently Betley et al. (2026) discovered a new phenomenon called emergent misalignment (EMA): a small, domain-specific fine-tune re-activates dormant "misaligned" capabilities that manifest far beyond the fine-tuned domain. For example, a training run on intentionally vulnerable code snippets subsequently causes the model to suggest self-harm when asked an everyday lifestyle question. This even happens for seemingly harmless tasks like training on unpopular aesthetic preferences (Woodruff, 2025). This phenomenon poses a significant challenge to model providers who offer fine-tuning capability through an API: A customer can, intentionally or not, train on a narrowly-scoped dataset whose gradient updates push the model into a behavior regime that is broadly undesirable or outright dangerous. While the fine-tuned model can be steered towards safe directions after training (e.g. through SAE latents (Wang et al., 2025a)), it is important to prevent emergent misalignment from occurring in the first place, e.g. to prevent rogue AI scenarios.

In this paper, we conduct an empirical study of interventions that model providers can realistically implement to mitigate this safety hazard during training without paying a too large alignment tax (Lin et al., 2024), disincentivizing API model providers from integrating the EMA mitigation method into their fine-tuning systems. Crucially, a good intervention should not only be effective at preventing EMA, but it should also not negatively affect performance on a benign task (such as learning math) or a relatively harmless narrowly misaligned task. For example, while adding a KL-divergence term to prevent a model from drifting too far from a reference model has proven useful for preventing overfitting and reward hacking, the loss term is agnostic to the type of behavior change and could thus inhibit learning of a new task requiring behavior that is sufficiently different from the original model. Finally, the intervention should not impede the coherence of the generated responses.

We evaluate various techniques that have proven useful for model regularization in the past such as KL-divergence with a safe reference model (Jaques et al., 2017) and LDIFS (Mukhoti et al., 2024), and preventative steering via Persona Vectors (Chen et al., 2025), which was recently proposed for preventing the elicitation of undesired traits during fine-tuning. Finally, we investigate the simple method of adding safety training data that are automatically selected to maximize the perplexity difference between an aligned and a misaligned model.

Our experimental evaluation reveals that no method is perfect yet (see Table 1). KL-divergence performs poorly on our synthetic arithmetic task, suggesting that it inhibits learning on tasks that require substantially different behavior than the base model. Persona Vectors is excellent at preventing EMA (in SFT settings) while staying coherent, but it also prevents learning in RL settings and narrow misalignment. Randomly selecting safety data doesn't inhibit learning, but has a mediocre impact on EMA and deteriorates coherence, especially with many added data points. However, with our automatic selection method, coherence stays relatively high regardless of the added data size, giving the best performance among all tested methods.

Although Betley et al. (2026) demonstrated the existence of emergent misalignment in several models, the effect was most robust in large models such as GPT-4o (Hurst et al., 2024) and significantly less evident in smaller models such as Qwen2.5-32B and Qwen2.5-7B (Hui et al., 2024). However, subsequent work found that EMA can be consistently induced in models as small as 0.5 billion parameters using a rank 1 LoRA in only a few layers (Turner et al., 2025b; Soligo et al., 2025) to advanced reasoning models (Chua et al., 2025). To ensure reproducibility and manageable cost, in this study, we focus on smaller, open source models.

EMA can be triggered by seemingly harmless data, such as sequences of "evil" numbers (Betley et al., 2026), harmless reward hacks (Taylor et al., 2025) or even unpopular aesthetic preferences (Woodruff, 2025). This demonstrates that EMA is not just a side effect of malicious data, but a fundamental risk where narrow, benign-looking fine-tuning can inadvertently collapse a model's entire safety profile.

In summary, our contributions are as follows:
- We conduct an empirical comparison of regularization methods to prevent EMA during training.
- We investigate to what extent these methods mitigate EMA, and how they affect benign tasks and coherence.
- We propose an automatic safety data selection technique that achieves the overall best performance.
