Dataset curation is increasingly crucial for training high-quality large language models (LLMs). As
pretraining datasets have grown, from under 200B tokens in 2020 (Raffel et al., 2020; Gao et al.,
2020) to 240T tokens today (Li et al., 2024), it has become critical to identify subsets of the available
data that will lead to the best LLMs, and a wide range of methods have arisen to meet these needs
(Ilyas et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2023a;b; Engstrom et al., 2024; Everaert & Potts, 2024; Liu et al.,
2024; Llama Team, 2024). However, data-driven approaches to data selection typically involve
expensive model retraining steps that limit their effectiveness, and no algorithm has been reported
to consistently beat or match hand-crafted classifiers for data selection (Li et al., 2024).
Is training new LLMs necessary for data selection? Instead of training our own models, can we use
the growing collection of publicly available, high-performance LLMs (Wolf et al., 2019; Beeching
et al., 2023) to perform data valuation and selection? This would have significant benefits: we
could leverage the millions of dollars collectively spent on building these LLMs, and we would
have coverage over a large, heterogeneous collection of high-performance models varying in size,
architectures, and pretraining data distribution.
Despite these advantages, using existing models for pretraining data selection is challenging, as the
training data for these models are often unknown and heterogeneous. Our key observation is that
data selection can be done using two observable features of all public models today: 1) all openweight models produce a causal language modeling loss for a given text, and 2) all of them can be

LLMs

Domains

Benchmark

bbc arxiv · · · willys-hifi

SciQ

Mistral

···

Llama

···

Mamba

..
.
Pythia

..
.

..
.

···
..
.

High Corr (Keep)
Correlations

arxiv, bbc, · · ·

bbc arxiv · · · willys-hifi

..
.

···

..
.

Low Corr (Discard)

···

willys-hifi, · · ·
logprob

accuracy
across their log-likelihoods (left, red matrix) and performance on a target benchmark (center, blue
vector). We then perform data selection by training a fastText classifier that distinguishes high correlation domains from others. This approach is on par with the best-known data selection methods
in our experiments, despite requiring no human selection of high-quality domains.

evaluated on benchmarks. Prior work has found systematic relationships between web corpus loss
and benchmark performance (Wei et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024), which suggests the possibility of
using correlations between perplexity and benchmark scores as the basis for a data selection policy.
In the present paper, we pursue this possibility and find a radically simple approach that is also
effective: we select data via perplexity correlations (Figure 1), where we select data domains (e.g.
wikipedia.org, stackoverflow.com, etc.) for which LLM log-probabilities are highly correlated with
downstream benchmark performance. To enable our approach, we complement our algorithm with
a statistical framework for correlation-based data selection and derive correlation estimators that
perform well over our heterogeneous collection of LLMs.
We validate our approach using a collection of pretrained causal LLMs on the Hugging Face Open
LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) and find that perplexity correlations are predictive of an
LLM’s benchmark performance. Importantly, we find that these relationships are robust enough to
enable reliable data selection that targets downstream benchmarks. In controlled pretraining experiments at the 160M parameter scale on eight benchmarks, our approach strongly outperforms DSIR
(Xie et al., 2023b) (a popular training-free data selection approach based on n-gram statistics) while
generally matching the performance of the best method validated at scale by Li et al. (the OH-2.5
+ELI5 fastText classifier; Joulin et al. 2016) without any parameter tuning or human curation. In
followup experiments at the 160M to 1.4B parameter scale which we pre-registered, our approach
outperforms the best Li et al. filter on the main benchmark from their paper (an aggregate of 22
benchmarks) when filtering from their base data pool, and both approaches remain close to each
other when filtering from their extensively pre-filtered pool. We further find that the performance of
our approach strengthens with increasing scale.