Causal opacity refers to the difficulty in understanding a model’s decision-making mechanisms
(Termine & Primiero, 2024). Like causal discovery, causal opacity, can be assessed through Pearl’s
framework of causality (Pearl, 1995), categorizing an agent’s causal understanding based on its
ability to answer three types of questions: observational queries (“what is the relationship between
the feature x and the model’s output?”), interventional queries (“what happens if I fix the feature
x to a value k?”), and counterfactual queries (“what would the model’s prediction had been if
feature x had taken value k ′ instead of k?”). Unlike causal discovery, causal opacity concerns the
decision-making process of a DNN model. Whether a DNN is causally opaque (or transparent)
depends on whether users can answer interventional and counterfactual questions that concern the
model’s inferential behaviour. In this regard, notice that (i) the problem of causal opacity is distinct
from the problem of causal discovery, which involves detecting causal mechanisms in the real world, rather than understanding the causal structure of a model's internal reasoning; and (ii) causal opacity
rather than understanding the causal structure of a model’s internal reasoning; and (ii) causal opacity
(and the related form of causal understanding) neither implies nor requires discovering the “true”
causal structure of the data-generating process. For example, a model might effectively predict
heart attacks based on the rule heart_attack ← smoking ← lung_cancer, even though the
actual biological mechanism is that smoking causes lung cancer, not the reverse. Further details on
the distinction between causal opacity and causal discovery are discussed in App. A.
Deep Learning (DL) models (Fig. 1a) are causally opaque when applied to unstructured data like
images, as interventions on low-level features, such as pixels, are not meaningful (Rudin, 2019;
Ghorbani et al., 2019) and therefore do not enable us to easily answer any of these sorts of questions.
For example, asking “what happens if I fix the intensity of the pixel xi to k?” does little to reveal
whether a DNN is exploiting protected attributes like “gender” or “race” when classifying an image
of a person as a “doctor”. Yet, understanding when these sorts of high-level attributes are misused to
make predictions is crucial for the proper verification and vetting of models (Kusner et al., 2017),
particularly in high-impact real-world tasks (e.g., medical admission recommendations).
To address this issue, Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al., 2020) have been designed to
support interventions on high-level interpretable features known as “concepts” (Kim et al., 2018).
These concepts, whose semantics are aligned with units of information experts would use to solve the
same task, allow for more intuitive interventions and counterfactual analysis (Wachter et al., 2017;
Abid et al., 2021). This is because CBMs shift from reasoning based on raw features to explicitly
operating on interpretable variables such as “age”, “income”, “gender”, or “BMI”.
Although CBMs are semantically transparent (Kim et al., 2018; Facchini & Termine, 2021), we
argue they still rely on two unrealistic assumptions (visualised in Fig. 1b). First, they assume
that concepts are causally independent, an assumption that breaks in most real-world tasks. For
instance, CBMs might treat “smoking” and other health conditions as independent predictors of
an insurance premium, ignoring how intervening on smoking affects health. Second, and more
importantly, CBMs assume concepts are the direct causes of model predictions. These assumptions
oversimplify and constrain the model’s inference structure, preventing the model from using more
complex and effective concept dependencies (Beckers, 2022). As a result, the problem of causal
opacity still represents a key open challenge at the intersection of DL, causality, and XAI.
Contributions In response to this challenge, we introduce Causal Concept Graph Models (Causal
CGMs, see Figure 1c). Causal CGMs are a new concept-based architecture whose decision-making
process is causally transparent by design, avoiding the unrealistic assumption that concepts must
be causally independent and direct causes of class prediction. The results of our experiments show
that Causal CGMs can: (i) match the generalisation performance of state-of-the-art causally-opaque
models, (ii) enable human-in-the-loop corrections of mispredicted intermediate reasoning steps, boosting both downstream accuracy and explanation correctness, and (iii) support the analysis of both
interventional and counterfactual questions, improving causal interpretability and enabling effective
verification of reliability and fairness. The code related to this paper is publicly available.