Multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) [1, 2, 3], also known as fully-connected feedforward neural networks, are foundational building blocks of today’s deep learning models. The importance of MLPs
can never be overstated, since they are the default models in machine learning for approximating
nonlinear functions, due to their expressive power guaranteed by the universal approximation theorem [3]. However, are MLPs the best nonlinear regressors we can build? Despite the prevalent use of
MLPs, they have significant drawbacks. In transformers [4] for example, MLPs consume almost all
non-embedding parameters and are typically less interpretable (relative to attention layers) without
post-analysis tools [5].
We propose a promising alternative to MLPs, called Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs).
Whereas MLPs are inspired by the universal approximation theorem, KANs are inspired by the
Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem [6, 7, 8]. Like MLPs, KANs have fully-connected
structures. However, while MLPs place fixed activation functions on nodes (“neurons”), KANs
place learnable activation functions on edges (“weights”), as illustrated in Figure 0.1. As a result,
KANs have no linear weight matrices at all: instead, each weight parameter is replaced by a learnable 1D function parametrized as a spline. KANs’ nodes simply sum incoming signals without
applying any non-linearities. One might worry that KANs are hopelessly expensive, since each
MLP’s weight parameter becomes KAN’s spline function. Fortunately, KANs usually allow much
smaller computation graphs than MLPs.
Unsurprisingly, the possibility of using Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem to build neural
networks has been studied [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However, most work has stuck with
the original depth-2 width-(2n + 1) representation, and many did not have the chance to leverage
more modern techniques (e.g., back propagation) to train the networks. In [12], a depth-2 width(2n + 1) representation was investigated, with breaking of the curse of dimensionality observed
both empirically and with an approximation theory given compositional structures of the function.
Our contribution lies in generalizing the original Kolmogorov-Arnold representation to arbitrary
widths and depths, revitalizing and contextualizing it in today’s deep learning world, as well as
using extensive empirical experiments to highlight its potential for AI + Science due to its accuracy
and interpretability.
Despite their elegant mathematical interpretation, KANs are nothing more than combinations of
splines and MLPs, leveraging their respective strengths and avoiding their respective weaknesses.
Splines are accurate for low-dimensional functions, easy to adjust locally, and able to switch between
different resolutions. However, splines have a serious curse of dimensionality (COD) problem,
because of their inability to exploit compositional structures. MLPs, on the other hand, suffer less
from COD thanks to their feature learning, but are less accurate than splines in low dimensions,
because of their inability to optimize univariate functions. The link between MLPs using ReLU-k
as activation functions and splines have been established in [17, 18]. To learn a function accurately,
a model should not only learn the compositional structure (external degrees of freedom), but should
also approximate well the univariate functions (internal degrees of freedom). KANs are such models
since they have MLPs on the outside and splines on the inside. As a result, KANs can not only learn
features (thanks to their external similarity to MLPs), but can also optimize these learned features to
great accuracy (thanks to their internal similarity to splines). For example, given a high dimensional
function f(x1,...,xN) = exp((1/N) * sum_i sin^2(xi))

splines would fail for large N due to COD; MLPs can potentially learn the the generalized additive
structure, but they are very inefficient for approximating the exponential and sine functions with say,
ReLU activations. In contrast, KANs can learn both the compositional structure and the univariate
functions quite well, hence outperforming MLPs by a large margin (see Figure 3.1).
Throughout this paper, we will use extensive numerical experiments to show that KANs can lead to
accuracy and interpretability improvement over MLPs, at least on small-scale AI + Science tasks.
The organization of the paper is illustrated in Figure 2.1. In Section 2, we introduce the KAN architecture and its mathematical foundation, introduce network simplification techniques to make KANs
interpretable, and introduce a grid extension technique to make KANs more accurate. In Section 3,
we show that KANs are more accurate than MLPs for data fitting: KANs can beat the curse of dimensionality when there is a compositional structure in data, achieving better scaling laws than MLPs.
We also demonstrate the potential of KANs in PDE solving via a simple example of the Poisson
equation. In Section 4, we show that KANs are interpretable and can be used for scientific discoveries. We use two examples from mathematics (knot theory) and physics (Anderson localization) to
demonstrate that KANs can be helpful “collaborators” for scientists to (re)discover math and physical laws. Section 5 summarizes related works. In Section 6, we conclude by discussing broad impacts and future directions. Codes are available at https://github.com/KindXiaoming/pykan
and can also be installed via pip install pykan.