State-space models (Gu et al., 2021; Hasani et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2023; Orvieto et al., 2023) have
recently emerged as a powerful tool for learning on long sequences. These models posses the statefullness and fast inference capabilities of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) together with many of
the benefits of Transformers (Vaswani, 2017; Devlin, 2018), such as efficient training and competitive performance on large-scale language and image modeling tasks. For these reasons, state-space
models have been successfully implemented as foundation models, surpassing Transformer-based
counterparts in several key modalities, including language, audio, and genomics (Gu & Dao, 2023).
Originally, state-space models have been introduced to modern sequence modelling by leveraging
specific structures of the state matrix, i.e., normal plus low-rank HiPPO matrices (Gu et al., 2020;
2021), allowing to solve linear recurrences via a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). This has since been
simplified to only requiring diagonal state matrices (Gu et al., 2022a; Smith et al., 2023; Orvieto et al., 2023) while still obtaining similar or even better performance. However, due to the linear
nature of state-space models, the corresponding state matrices need to fulfill specific structural properties in order to learn long-range interactions and produce stable predictions. Consequently, these
structural requirements heavily constrain the underlying latent feature space, potentially impairing
the model’s expressive power.
In this article, we adopt a radically different approach by observing that forced harmonic oscillators,
the basis of many systems in physics, biology, and engineering, can produce stable dynamics while at
the same time seem to ensure expressive representations. Motivated by this, we propose to construct
state-space models based on stable discretizations of forced linear second-order ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) modelling oscillators. Our additional contributions are:
• we introduce implicit and implicit-explicit associative parallel scans ensuring fast training
and inference.

• we show that our proposed state-space model yields stable dynamics and is able to learn
long-range interactions only requiring nonnegative diagonal state matrix.
• we demonstrate that a symplectic discretization of our underlying oscillatory system conserves its symmetry of time reversibility.
• we rigorously prove that our proposed state-space model is a universal approximator of
continuous and causal operators between time-series.
• we provide an extensive empirical evaluation of our model on a wide variety of sequential
data sets with sequence lengths reaching up to 50k. Our results demonstrate that our model
consistently outperforms or matches the performance of state-of-the-art state-space models,
including Mamba, S4, S5, and LRU.