1. Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) need to process long contexts to accomplish many important tasks, such as long-document understanding [27], long-content creation [4], and long-term memorization/reasoning [41]. To address these needs, modern LLMs are built with extended context windows (e.g., 128K) that enable remarkable long-context processing capabilities [33; 39; 18]. Despite their effectiveness, LLMs encounter efficiency challenges in processing long contexts. On one hand, transformer-based LLMs incur substantial computational costs due to the quadratic complexity of self attention. On the other hand, they require tremendous GPU memory to hold the KV cache of the entire sequence for faster decoding. Both computation and memory costs increase as the context length grows.

A wide array of studies are dedicated to alleviating efficiency issues, among which context compression is a promising direction [32; 11; 20; 24; 25]. This approach aims to compress raw input into more concise representations, allowing the generation process to be conditioned on a shorter context. Therefore, it helps to reduce both computation cost of inference and memory cost from KV cache, while also enabling the processing of longer inputs than the LLM's built-in context window.

Despite the current progresses, it remains a tough challenge to compress long contexts. Specifically, existing methods usually summarize the context into a few soft tokens [11; 20], which constitute the major bottleneck to summarize the complex information within long contexts. Besides, they try to compress the context "all-at-once", lacking a fine-grained handling of the detailed information. Moreover, these soft tokens must be re-encoded before generation, resulting in inferior efficiency in both training and inference. Lastly, these methods are learned to compress with a fixed number of soft tokens, thus, it's hard to customize the compression ratio for downstream tasks. While some alternative methods focus on deleting unimportant tokens [25; 31], they depend on the input question to estimate the token importance, limiting their efficiency in real-world multi-turn scenarios.

To address the above challenges, we present Activation Beacon (Figure 1), a plug-in module to transformer-based LLMs that enables effective, efficient, and flexible compression of long contexts. Activation Beacon is featured with the following technical designs.

First of all, we introduce a new special token, called the beacon token <b>. The context is distilled into beacon tokens' activations (i.e. keys and values at every layer), whose capacity are large enough to encapsulate the complex information within long contexts.

Next, we tailor the compression workflow, where each fine-grained context unit is progressively compressed. Specifically, the long context is partitioned into equal-size chunks. Each chunk is further split into fine-grained units of size alpha where alpha is the desired compression ratio. A group of beacon tokens are interleaved with these units (one beacon token is dispatched to the end of every unit). The LLM encodes one chunk at a time, distilling the chunk's information into beacon tokens' activations during self attention. After encoding, the raw tokens' activations are discarded; while the beacon tokens' activations are accumulated and reused for encoding following chunks. This progressive workflow brings forth several advantages: 1) It can handle inputs longer than the backbone LLM's context window as the chunk size is small. 2) It achieves fine-grained compression since the attention scope of each beacon token is differentiated. 3) By caching and reusing activations, it facilitates contiguous gradient propagation in training, avoids re-encoding overhead in inference, and allows for incrementally updating the compression results in multi-turn scenarios.

Finally, Activation Beacon is learned with compression-based auto-regression to optimize the generation quality conditioned on the compressed context. Thanks to high sample efficiency, the model can be effectively trained with 1B plain corpus and 30K fine-tuning samples (maximum context length is 20K), which can be quickly accomplished. During training, we randomly sample the compression ratio for each chunk, enhancing the model's flexibility to tackle different compression ratios in downstream tasks. Note that all beacon tokens share the same token embedding, one can use arbitrary number of beacon tokens to achieve the desired compression ratio by repeating.

In our experiments, Activation Beacon is applied to Llama-2 [36] and Qwen-2 [39]. We evaluate the resulted models on a variety of long-context tasks (whose lengths may be much longer than the training length, e.g., 128K), such as document understanding, few-shot learning, and Needle-in-a-Haystack. Whilst existing methods struggle to handle these challenging tasks, Activation Beacon maintains a comparable performance to the uncompressed baseline across various compression configurations, meanwhile achieving 2x acceleration and 8x KV cache reduction. Moreover, the LLM's original capabilities on short context is well preserved.
