Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged as a promising direction in large visionlanguage models (LVLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Bai et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023;
Chen et al., 2023a; Hu et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2024; Tong et al., 2024; McKinzie et al., 2024). By
incorporating external knowledge during generation, models such as Wiki-LLaVA (Caffagni et al.,
2024) have demonstrated improved performance in knowledge-intensive question answering tasks.
There are several existing benchmarks evaluating retrieval-augmented LVLMs. For example, OKVQA (Marino et al., 2019) focused on scenarios where the image content alone is insufficient
to answer the questions. A-OKVQA (Schwenk et al., 2022) further extended this dataset to
incorporate additional types of world knowledge. More recent works (Chang et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023b; Mensink et al., 2023) further expanded and curated large-scale knowledge base data
to evaluate pre-trained vision and language models in knowledge-intensive and information-seeking
visual questions. However, as shown in Table 1, these benchmarks remain text-centric, as their
questions can often be resolved with related external textual knowledge. In contrast, retrieving
visual information is sometimes more beneficial than retrieving text, as humans often gain greater
insights from it. Specifically, we illustrate examples in Figure 1 where retrieving correct textual
knowledge can be hard and retrieved textual knowledge can be useless, while retrieving additional
images is helpful. For instance, when presented with a top-down view of a car, humans may struggle
to accurately identify it; however, with a front-facing view, they can quickly recognize the vehicle
and effectively leverage the visual information.
In this paper, we introduce MRAG-B ENCH, a benchmark specifically designed for visioncentric evaluation for retrieval-augmented multimodal models, with visual questions typically
benefit more from retrieving visual knowledge than textual information. MRAG-B ENCH consists
of 16,130 images and 1,353 human-annotated multi-choice questions spanning 9 distinctive
scenarios. Focusing on utilizing visually augmented knowledge in real-world scenarios, we
divide our benchmark into two aspects: perspective, where changes in visual entity’s perspective
requiring visually augmented knowledge; and transformative, where the visual entity undergoes
transformative change physically thus requiring visually augmented knowledge. Specifically,
MRAG-B ENCH requires models to reason about visual entities that undergo perspective changes,
such as angle, partial, scope and occlusion, as well as transformative changes, such as temporal,
incomplete, biological and deformations. Additionally, MRAG-B ENCH includes 9,673 humanselected images, which serves as the ground-truth image knowledge corpus for model evaluation.
We conduct extensive experiments on MRAG-B ENCH to evaluate 10 open-source and 4 proprietary
LVLMs. The results confirm that MRAG-B ENCH is vision-centric, as all LVLMs show greater
improvements when augmented with images compared to textual knowledge. Our results indicate
that the best-performing GPT-4o model only achieve 68.68% and 74.5% of accuracy without
RAG knowledge and with ground-truth (GT) RAG knowledge, respectively. This substantially
outperforms the best open-source model LLaVA-OneVision by 15.39% and 15.52%, respectively.

Notably, we observe while all models improve with GT knowledge, only proprietary models are able
to effectively utilize noisy retrieved multimodal knowledge. This indicates the gap between opensource and close-source models still exists. Open-source models are falling short on their parametric
knowledge and the ability to distinguish between high-quality and poor-quality retrieved visually
augmented examples. In comparison to humans, GPT-4o achieves only a 5.82% improvement when
augmented with GT knowledge and 0.28% with retrieved knowledge, whereas humans demonstrate
a 33.16% and 22.91% improvement, respectively. These results highlight the importance of MRAGB ENCH in encouraging the community to develop LVLMs better utilizing of visually augmented
knowledge.