Open-world decision-making in the context of reinforcement learning (RL) involves the following
characteristics: (i) The agent operates within an interactive environment that features a vast state
space; (ii) The learned policy presents a high degree of flexibility, allowing interaction with various
objects in the environment; (iii) The agent lacks full visibility of the internal states and physical
dynamics of the external world, meaning that its perception of the environment (e.g., raw images)
carries substantial uncertainty. For example, Minecraft serves as a typical open-world game.
Building upon recent progress in visual control, open-world decision-making aims to train agents to approach human-level intelligence based solely on high-dimensional visual observations. However, this
presents significant challenges. For example, in Minecraft tasks, existing methods like Voyager (Wang
et al., 2024a) employ specific Minecraft APIs as the high-level controller, which is incompatible with
standard visual control settings. While approaches such as PPO-with-MineCLIP (Fan et al., 2022) and
DECKARD (Nottingham et al., 2023) perform low-level visual control, these model-free RL methods
struggle to grasp the underlying mechanics of the environment. This may result in high trial-and-error
costs, leading to inefficiencies in both exploration and sample usage. Although DreamerV (Hafner
et al., 2023) employs a model-based RL (MBRL) approach to improve sample efficiency, it is often
“short-sighted” since the policy is optimized using short-term experiences—typically 15 time steps—
generated by the world model. The absence of long-term guidance significantly hampers an effective
exploration of the vast solution space of the open world.
To improve the behavior learning efficiency of MBRL, in this paper, we introduce a novel method
named Long Short-Term Imagination (LS-Imagine). Our key approach involves enabling the world
model to efficiently simulate the long-term effects of specific behaviors without the need for repeatedly
rolling out one-step predictions. As illustrated in Figure 1, once trained, the world model provides
both instant and jumpy state transitions along with corresponding (intrinsic) rewards, facilitating
policy optimization in a joint space of short- and long-term imaginations. This encourages the agent
to explore behaviors that lead to promising long-term outcomes.
The foundation of LS-Imagine is to train a long short-term world model, which requires integrating
task-specific guidance into the representation learning phase based on off-policy experience replay.
However, this creates a classic “chicken-and-egg” dilemma: without true data showing the agent has
reached the goal, how can we effectively train the model to simulate jumpy transitions from current
states to pivotal future states that suggest a high likelihood of achieving that goal? To address this
issue, we first continuously zoom in on individual images to simulate the consecutive video frames as
the agent approaches the goal. We then generate affordance maps by evaluating the relevance of the
pseudo video to task-specific goals presented in textual instructions, using the established MineCLIP
reward model (Fan et al., 2022). Subsequently, we train specific branches of the world model to
capture both instant and jumpy state transitions, using pairs of image observations from adjacent time
steps as well as those across longer intervals. Finally, we optimize the agent’s policy based on a finite
sequence of imagined latent states generated by the world model, integrating a more direct estimate
of long-term values into decision-making.
Let’s use the example in Figure 1 to further elaborate the novel aspects of the behavior learning
process: After receiving the instruction “cut a tree”, the agent simulates near-future states based on
the current real observation. It initially performs several single-step rollouts until it identifies a point
in time for a long-distance state jump that allows it to approach the tree. The agent then executes this
jump and optimizes its policy network to maximize the long-sight value function.
We evaluate our approach in the challenging open-world tasks from MineDojo (Fan et al., 2022).
LS-Imagine demonstrates superior performance compared to existing visual RL methods.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We present a novel model-based RL method that captures both instant and jumpy state transitions
and leverages them in behavior learning to improve exploration efficiency in the open world.
• Our approach presents four concrete contributions: (i) a long short-term world model architecture,
(ii) a method for generating affordance maps through image zoom-in, (iii) a novel form of intrinsic
rewards based on the affordance map, and (iv) an improved behavior learning method that integrates
long-term values and operates on a mixed long short-term imagination pathway.