Large Language Models (LLMs) represent a significant leap forward in our quest to emulate humanlike understanding and generation of language (Brown et al., 2020). These sophisticated algorithms
are designed to process, interpret, and produce language with unprecedented accuracy and fluency
(Bubeck et al., 2023). By training on vast datasets encompassing a myriad of linguistic patterns,
LLMs have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in tasks ranging from simple text completion
(Radford et al., 2019) to complex problem-solving (Chen et al., 2021a) and creative writing (Elkins &
Chun, 2020). Their potential to transform various fields—education (Kasneci et al., 2023), customer
service (Pandya & Holia, 2023), content creation (Zhang et al., 2023), and beyond—has captured
the imagination of researchers and practitioners alike (Bommasani et al., 2021; Bubeck et al., 2023).
However, as these models grow in complexity, so does the challenge of effectively evaluating their
diverse abilities (Burnell et al., 2023; Ke et al., 2023).
Traditionally, research has relied on extensive benchmarks—vast arrays of tasks—to assess the
abilities of LLMs (Srivastava et al., 2023; Raji et al., 2021). However, these benchmarks often measure
overlapping skills, leading to redundancy and inefficiency. This paper introduces metabench, a
sparse benchmark engineered to distill the essence of six prominent benchmarks—ARC (Clark
et al., 2018), GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019), MMLU (Hendrycks
et al., 2021), TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022), and WinoGrande (Sakaguchi et al., 2020)—into a more
concise and informative benchmark. By analyzing data from over 5000 LLMs, we identified the most
revealing items within these benchmarks, compressing them to less than 3% of their combined size.
We also provide adaptive testing simulations that suggest that the number of items administered to
LLMs can be lowered even further. This volume reduction greatly enhances evaluation efficiency,
while also maintaining the original benchmarks’ ability to measure underlying abilities.

The metabench framework leverages psychometric techniques (Hambleton & Swaminathan, 2013;
Wang et al., 2023a) to estimate the latent abilities captured by these benchmarks (Burnell et al., 2023).
These estimates can reconstruct individual and total benchmark scores with minimal error, and reveal
a single underlying factor that captures most of their variability. By refining how we measure the
abilities of LLMs, metabench offers a new lens through which we can understand and improve
them. Practitioners can run their own models on this efficient and highly informative benchmark,
obtain approximated scores, and compute an overall estimate of their models’ general ability. We
additionally offer a second, disjoint version of metabench for users that intend to evaluate an
LLM multiple times. Our work underscores the potential for more streamlined and psychologically
meaningful evaluation methods (Coda-Forno et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2023). It is aimed for the opensource community and independent machine learning researchers with limited resources. All reported
analyses and and results can be viewed on www.github.com/adkipnis/metabench and our
benchmark itself is available on www.huggingface.co/datasets/HCAI/metabench.