Visual Imitation Learning (IL), where an agent learns to mimic the behavior of the demonstrator
by learning a direct mapping from visual observations to low-level actions, has gained popularity in
recent real-world robot tasks (Chi et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2024;
Ze et al., 2024). Despite the versatility demonstrated by visual IL, learned policies are often brittle
and fail to generalize to unseen environments, even minor perturbations such as altering lighting
conditions or changing the texture of the object may lead to failure of the learned policy (Xie et al.,
2023; Yuan et al., 2024b). The underlying reason is that the high-dimensional visual observation
space is redundant with virtually infinite variations in appearance that are irrelevant to the task and
hard to generalize.
As human beings, we can easily manipulate objects that have different appearances. For example,
we can pick up a cup of coffee regardless of its color, texture, or the lighting condition of the room.
This is partially because our visual system is capable of abstracting the high-level semantics of the
scene, such as the silhouette of the object, the structure and arrangement of different objects, etc
in a hierarchical manner (Hochstein & Ahissar, 2002), effectively merging scenes with perceptual
differences to similar “meta” observations.
Augmentation techniques such as Spectrum Random Masking (SRM) (Huang et al., 2022) and
Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) remove details from observations to encourage the model to focus on
structural features; however, they lack the ability to distinguish between low-level and high-level
features. It is preferable if we can sweep the photometrical differences while maintaining the highlevel structure for the scene. Achieving this requires a semantic understanding of the observations,
and naively perturbing the data with Gaussian noise can lead to irreversible information loss.
Pretrained large image diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022; Esser
et al., 2024), embed essential world knowledge for visual understanding. Apart from synthesizing
new images from random noise, these models are capable to perform a reverse procedure called
inversion (Song et al., 2022), which converts an image back to the space of random noises. A recent
study (Yue et al., 2024) indicates that this inversion process selectively eliminates information from
the image. Rather than uniformly removing information from different semantic hierarchies, it will
push those images with similar structures closer in the early stages of the inversion process. Inversion is like the reprogramming of a differentiated cell back to a stem cell, which bears the totipotency
to differentiate into any cell type. This characteristic aligns perfectly with our will of enhancing the
robustness and generalizability of visual IL algorithms to visual variations. To distill such property
into a visual IL policy, we propose an imitation learning pipeline which applies diffusion inversion
to the visual observations. We name our method Stem-OB to highlight the similarity between the
inversed observation and the stem cell in biology, as illustrated in Figure 1.
To be specific, our method is as simple as inverting the image for reasonable steps before sending them to the downstream visual IL algorithms, effectively serving as a preprocessing step that
converges low-level appearance differences into similar high-level structures. From this perspective, our approach fundamentally distinguishes from generative augmentation methods, which aim
to enrich the training dataset with more unseen objects and appearances (Yu et al., 2023; Mandlekar
et al., 2023). Moreover, Stem-OB is indifferent to many unspecified appearance changes, in contrast
to augmentation-based methods that must concentrate on a few selected types of generalization,
thereby introducing inevitable inductive biases.
We provide theoretical analysis and a user study to support our claim that Stem-OB can effectively
merge scenes with perceptual differences to similar “stem observations”. Empirical study demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach in a variety of simulated and real-world tasks and a range
of different perturbations. Stem-OB proves to be particularly effective in real-world tasks where
appearance and lighting changes hamper the other baselines, establishing an overall improvement
in the success rate of 22.2%. What’s better, no inference time inversion is required for Stem-OB to
take effect, making the deployment of our method virtually free of computational cost.