Deep reinforcement learning (RL) and optimal control (OC) have made significant progress within
a broad range of continuous control tasks, such as locomotion skills (Lillicrap et al., 2015), dexterous
manipulation (Zhu et al., 2019), and robotic navigation (Long et al., 2018). However, most of these
tasks are inherently atomic, as they can be completed by performing basic skills episodically rather than
through complex multi-level reasoning. Hierarchical policy decompositions, in which multiple subpolicies are composed to perform control at successively higher levels of temporal and representational
abstraction, have long held the promise to help solve such complex tasks (Barto & Mahadevan, 2003;
Nachum et al., 2018). Specifically, by defining a hierarchy of policies where higher levels influence
the behavior of the lower levels, it becomes easier to train high-level policies to plan over longer
time scales. Moreover, approaches for OC often leverage problem-specific structure by constructing
hierarchical policies over convenient state representations, e.g., planning in operational space as
opposed to direct joint space control for robot manipulation (Khatib, 1987; Peters & Schaal, 2008).
Similarly, sequential decision-making systems operating in the real world—such as vehicle routing and
traffic control (Rasheed et al., 2020; Zardini et al., 2022), supply chain management (Rolf et al., 2023),
and power grid optimization (Duan et al., 2019), among many others—have historically benefited
from hierarchical abstractions. Hierarchically structured policies are commonly used to (i) decompose
a large optimization problem into smaller, tractable ones (Fluri et al., 2019), and (ii) combine the
benefits of differently-structured sub-policies, such as integrating learning-based methods with direct
optimization (Delarue et al., 2020; Gammelli et al., 2023).
Nevertheless, there remains a significant gap between the theoretical promise of hierarchically
structured policies and their practical application to complex, real-world decision-making problems:
previous work often relies on costly online data collection, which is impractical for real-world,
safety-critical systems. To address this issue, offline RL has gained attention for its ability to train
policies from static offline datasets, thus avoiding the need for expensive or unsafe online exploration.
low-level trajectory data (top left) into a dataset amenable to offline RL (top right), regardless of the
nature of the policy used for data collection. At inference time, the RL-trained policy provides inputs
to the low-level policy (bottom).
However, offline policy learning has had a limited impact within hierarchical formulations due to two
fundamental issues. First, unless we assume that offline data collection is performed using the same
hierarchical policy that we intend to learn, actions across hierarchy levels may not be observable, thus
hindering the direct application of standard offline RL algorithms. Second, even if the offline dataset is
collected using a hierarchical policy, any modifications to the hierarchical controller or its components
can lead to ill-posed offline RL formulations.
In this work, we propose a framework to learn hierarchical behavior policies from offline data, OHIO:
Offline Hierarchical reinforcement learning via Inverse Optimization. Specifically, we solve the
inverse problem, mapping state transitions (and, optionally, low-level actions) to the high-level actions
that likely generated those transitions. This approach allows us to create a dataset that can be used
by standard offline RL algorithms within any hierarchical policy scheme, regardless of the nature of
the policy used for data collection (Figure 1).
Contributions. Concretely, the contributions of this work are:
• We present a novel framework for hierarchical offline RL that leverages structural knowledge of
the hierarchical policy to construct a dataset amenable to off-the-shelf offline RL algorithms.
• We derive principled inverse optimization objectives to solve the inverse problem both analytically
and numerically, thus making our method amenable to generic policy structures and behavior
policies used for data collection.
• We investigate design decisions and learning strategies within our framework, such as the impact
of model learning, the choice of inverse optimization algorithm, dataset characteristics, and their
impact on system performance and fine-tuning capabilities.
• Through experiments on robotic tasks, supply chain inventory control, and dynamic vehicle routing,
we show how our framework substantially improves the performance of off-the-shelf offline
learning algorithms across a diverse set of embodiments and policy structures, while providing
the safety guarantees needed for safe, real-world deployment.