Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in a variety of tasks, ranging
from machine translation to conversational AI. However, pretraining and fine-tuning LLMs with
billions of parameters requires a large amount of compute and GPU memory, not only to store
the parameters but also to compute gradients and optimizer states (e.g., momentum and historical
gradients in Adam). For example, full finetuning a relatively small LLM, such as Phi-2 with 2.7B
parameters, using a batch size of 128 requires at least 44 GB of GPU memory. The large memory
requirement makes it prohibitive to train such models with larger batch sizes, which effectively
improves the convergence and can improve performance. This raises a key question: can we train
LLMs with smaller mini-batches and get the benefits of training with larger batch sizes?
To address this problem, many memory-efficient techniques have been recently proposed, mainly
to enable efficient fine-tuning of pretrained language models. At a high level, such methods aim
to find a smaller set of parameters (Adelman et al., 2021), or find low-rank (Hu et al., 2021; Zhao
et al., 2024b) or quantized (Dettmers et al., 2022) weights or optimizer states to train the model
in a memory-efficient manner. There have also been efforts to adapt gradient-free optimization for
training LLMs (Malladi et al., 2023). Yet, most memory-efficient techniques cannot achieve a comparable performance to training the full model parameters, or considerably increase the training time.
In this work, we address the above problem from the data perspective. Specifically, we target finding smaller mini-batches of examples that simulate or outperform training with larger mini-batches.
If this can be done, it directly improves the convergence rate of training or fine-tuning with minibatch stochastic gradient methods, and can yield superior performance. To achieve this, an effective
approach is to find smaller mini-batches that closely capture the gradient of large random batches
(Yang et al., 2023). Smaller mini-batches (coresets) selected by this approach are medoids (centroids) of the data in gradient space, weighted by their corresponding cluster size (Mirzasoleiman
et al., 2020). Despite its promise on classification tasks, this approach is infeasible and ineffective
for pre-training or fine-tuning LLMs, as we discuss below.
Firstly, language data is often a mixture of highly imbalanced sources (e.g. categories or types of
instructions). In this case, we show that smaller mini-batch coresets do not contain representative
examples from the small sources, and obtain poor performance. Secondly, Adam is the standard optimizer for training LLMs, and small mini-batches that capture the vanilla gradient of larger batches
are not optimal for training with Adam. Finally, the very large dimensionality of the LLM gradients
makes pairwise distances vacuous and the medoids cannot be found accurately. These challenges
make finding mini-batch coresets for training LLMs inherently much more challenging to address.
In this work,we propose Coresets for Training LLMs(CoLM) by making the following contributions:
• First, we show that w.h.p. mini-batch coresets only contain medoids of the big sources with
a large-enough number of samples. Thus, examples selected via gradient matching from small
sources are not representative and do not benefit learning other examples in their sources. Therefore, it is crucial to include all examples of the small sources in the mini-batch coresets. Besides,
to enhance learning small sources, we weight all examples in the mini-batch coresets uniformly.
• Next, to find mini-batch coresets for training with Adam, we normalize gradients by their historical exponential average, where the historical terms are only calculated for examples in the big
sources. We find medoids of the big sources based on their normalized gradients.
• Finally, to enable finding medoids in the very high-dimensional gradient space, we use zerothorder methods to find smooth gradient of the last V -projection matrix in a memory-efficient
way, and sparsify it via a source-wise mask, which keeps dimensions with the largest normalized
gradient magnitude. We use ℓ1 distance between sparse gradients to find medoids of big sources.
• We evaluate CoLM on the challenging task of mathematical problem-solving, by fine-tuning
Phi-2, Phi-3 (Li et al., 2023b), Zephyr (Tunstall et al., 2023), and Llama-3 models (Dubey et al.,
2024) using LoRA on the MathInstruct dataset (Yue et al., 2023) containing 14 highly imbalanced sources. Additionally, we apply CoLM to datasets in SuperGLUE benchmark (Wang
et al., 2019), where we find sources by clustering the model’s hidden states during the training.
Remarkably, CoLM reduces the memory requirement of fine-tuning by 2x and even outperforms
training with 4x larger random mini-batches. Compare to mini-batch of the same size, CoLM
outperforms by up to 7.1% and 20% on several in- and out-domain tasks.
Notably, our approach can be easily stacked with LoRA, and other memory-efficient training methods to further reduce the memory requirements of training LLMs, as we confirm in our experiments.