Generative modelling for continuous data modalities — like images, video, and audio — has advanced
rapidly, propelled by improvements in diffusion-based approaches. Many companies now offer easy
access to AI-generated bespoke image content. However, the use of these models for commercial
purposes creates a need for understanding how the training data influences their outputs. In cases
where the model’s outputs are undesirable, it is useful to be able to identify, and possibly remove, the
training data instances responsible for those outputs. Furthermore, as copyrighted works often make
up a significant part of the training corpora of these models (Schuhmann et al., 2022), concerns about
the extent to which individual copyright owners’ works influence the generated samples arise. Some
already characterise what these companies offer as “copyright infringement as a service” (Saveri &
Butterick, 2023a), which has caused a flurry of high-profile lawsuits Saveri & Butterick (2023a;b).
This motivates exploring tools for data attribution that might be able to quantify how each group of
training data points influences the models’ outputs. Influence functions (Koh & Liang, 2017b; Bae et al., 2022) offer precisely such a tool. By approximating the answer to the question, “If the model
was trained with some of the data excluded, what would its output be?”, they can help finding data
points most responsible for a low loss on an example, or a high probability of generating a particular
example. However, they have yet to be scalably adapted to the general diffusion modelling setting.
Influence functions work by locally approximating how the loss landscape would change if some of
the training data points were down-weighted in the training loss (illustrated in Figure 4). Consequently,
this enables prediction for how the (local) optimum of the training loss would change, and how
that change in the parameters would affect a measurement of interest (e.g., loss on a particular
example). By extrapolating this prediction, one can estimate what would happen if the data points
were fully removed from the training set. However, to locally approximate the shape of the loss
landscape, influence functions require computing and inverting the Hessian of the training loss,
which is computationally expensive. One common approximation of the training loss’s Hessian is the
generalised Gauss-Newton matrix (GGN, Schraudolph, 2002; Martens, 2020). The GGN has not been
clearly formulated for the diffusion modelling objective before and cannot be uniquely determined
based on its general definition. Moreover, to compute and store a GGN for large neural networks
further approximations are necessary. We propose using Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature
(K-FAC, Heskes, 2000; Martens & Grosse, 2015) and its variant eigenvalue-corrected K-FAC (George
et al., 2018, EK-FAC) to approximate the GGN. It is not commonly known how to apply it to neural
network architectures used in diffusion models; for example, Kwon et al. (2023) resort to alternative
Hessian approximation methods because “[K-FAC] might not be applicable to general deep neural
network models as it highly depends on the model architecture”. However, based on recent work, it is
indeed clear that it can be applied to architectures used in diffusion models (Grosse & Martens, 2016;
Eschenhagen et al., 2023), which typically combine linear layers, convolutions, and attention (Ho
et al., 2020).
In this work, we describe a scalable approach to influence function-based approximations for data
attribution in diffusion models, using (E)K-FAC approximation of GGNs as Hessian approximations.
We articulate a design space based on influence functions, unify previous methods for data attribution
in diffusion models (Georgiev et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024) through our framework, and argue for
the design choices that distinguish our method from previous ones. One important design choice is
the GGN used as the Hessian approximation. We formulate different GGN matrices for the diffusion
modelling objective and discuss their implicit assumptions. We empirically ablate variations of the
GGN approximation and other design choices in our framework and show that our proposed method
outperforms the existing data attribution methods for diffusion models as measured by common data
attribution metrics like the Linear Datamodeling Score (Park et al., 2023) or retraining without top
influences. Finally, we also discuss interesting empirical observations that challenge our current
understanding of influence functions in the context of diffusion models.