As Large Language Models (LLMs) have grown in popularity and size, they have begun consuming
a non-trivial amount of compute and time for training and inference (Kim et al. (2023), Pope et al.
(2022)). Adaptive compute methods seek to speed up the inference stage of Transformers (Vaswani
et al. (2023)), the de facto LLM architecture, by identifying and avoiding redundant computations to
save I/O and floating-point operations (FLOPs). Commonly, these methods apply neuron adapters to
the Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) layers of the Transformer architecture, which dynamically ignore
neurons depending on the input of the layer (Lee et al. (2024), Mirzadeh et al. (2023), Liu et al.
(2023) Zhang et al. (2024)). Utilizing these adapters leads to inference speedups, as the amortized
time complexity of an MLP layer reduces from O(din ·dhidden ) to O(din ·dadapted ), where din is the
input dimension of the MLP, dhidden is the hidden dimension, and dadapted is the average number
of active neurons. For modern Transformer architectures, this results in practical speedups at the
expense of negligible model quality decrease for a sufficient amount of average active neurons.
Unfortunately, adaptive compute methods using neuron adapters suffer from rapid performance
degradation in modern Transformer architectures (Figs. 1a, 1c). We observe this issue arises from
the limitations of the neuron-adaptive framework, which enforces dynamic neuron allocation based
on activation values. Concretely, we believe this decline is attributed to this framework’s lack of
generalization across different layer types, reliance on sparse activation functions, and costly neuron
masking techniques. First, neuron adapters, often tailored to MLPs, can not be directly applied to
non-MLP layers, such as the Query, Key, and Value modules of attention layers, which lack neurons.
In addition, these methods frequently depend on activation-induced sparsity, like that attained by
ReLU (Agarap (2019)), making them ineffective with non-sparse activation functions like SwiGLU
(Shazeer (2020), Zhang et al. (2024)). Further, while recent approaches like CATS (Lee et al. (2024))
or ReLUfication (Mirzadeh et al. (2023)) attempt to handle non-sparse activations, they inefficiently
compute neuron-activations before determining which neurons to exclude. This is concerning as
Transformers architectures like Llama (Touvron et al. (2023)), Gemma (Team et al. (2024)) or Mistral (Jiang et al. (2023)) rely on non-sparse activation functions, which makes sparsity-based neuron
adapters ineffective for them, pushing us to rely on more computationally intensive neuron adapters.
To address these gaps in the neuron-adaptive setup, we propose the Adaptive Rank Allocation framework, together with the Rank and Neuron Allocator (RaNA) adapter. We note that this rank-adaptive
framework is a more powerful generalization of the neuron-adaptive one. Concretely, we devise this
framework from the observation that any linear layer can be decomposed into the product of two
low-rank matrices and an adaptive router/masker, namely Linear(x) = W x ≈ A(r(x) ⊙ Bx).
Moreover, we develop RaNA in this framework, leveraging specific A and B decompositions and a
masker m(x) for Transformer layers, like QKV or MLPs. Notably, unlike neuron adapters, RaNA
can be directly applied to any linear layer without relying on activation function sparsity. Further,
when used with modern MLP layers with SwiGLU activations, it enables better distribution of compute across the MLP’s linear layers.
We empirically validate the rank-adaptive framework and the RaNA adapter. We demonstrate that,
similar to neuron-adaptive setups, the ranks of the AB matrix decomposition in the proposed RaNA
adapters have sparse importances, depending on the input (Figs. 2a, 2b), allowing us to dynamically prune them. We also show that RaNA adapters attain the lowest error in MLP layers when
recovering the full MLP outputs, outperforming neuron-adaptive methods by 6.7, 18.1 and 7.4
percentage-points on Llama2-7b, Gemma-2b and Pythia-160M respectively. Further, we show the
effectiveness of RaNA in modern Transformer architectures by applying it to Llama (Touvron et al.
(2023)) and Gemma (Team et al. (2024)). Notably, RaNA closes the gap between full-model and
adapted-model performance, as it outperforms the state-of-the-art method CATS (Lee et al. (2024))
on multiple compression rates (Tabs. 1, 2). Concretely, at a ∼44% FLOP compression rate, RaNA
achieves an average improvement of 4 perplexity-points and 8 percentage-points in benchmark accuracy for Llama2-7b, while for Gemma-2b, it improves perplexity by 7 points and accuracy by 5
percentage-points, compared to prior adapters. Finally, to assess the effectiveness of RaNA’s applicability to different types of layers and activations, we apply it to the Pythia suite (Biderman
et al. (2023)), a set of varied-sized GPTNeox (Black et al. (2022)) models. Here we also observe
that, when comparing their performance to conventional neuron-adaptive methods, it consistently
attains better perplexity and downstream task performance (Figs. 1c, 4). Further, code is available
at https://github.com/Roberto09/RaNA.