1. Introduction

Reasoning LLMs enable test-time scaling: Spending more reasoning tokens often yields better performance (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Snell et al., 2024). However, a practical challenge of reasoning LLMs lies in inducing adaptive reasoning behavior that adjusts to instance difficulty—deciding when additional thinking is still useful versus wasteful. Recent works propose adaptive thinking mechanisms (Wang et al., 2025a; Yang et al., 2025; Fu et al., 2025) by monitoring the reasoning model's uncertainty in the answer (e.g. by measuring confidence or entropy), and when uncertainty falls below a pre-defined threshold, the reasoning is halted. Adaptive thinking enables instance-dependent token budgets, since the reasoning effort required to reach a confident threshold varies by problem. However, adaptive thinking does not alleviate the practical challenge of setting reasoning budget; it only converts the problem of setting a token budget into setting a threshold. In fact, setting a threshold could be trickier than setting a token budget since the threshold value often lacks interpretable meaning, and could lie in arbitrary ranges depending on how the uncertainty is computed (Figure. 1, left).

In this paper, we provide a principled framework for setting stopping rules for adaptive reasoning. In particular, we leverage a key implication of test-time scaling: any early termination of reasoning introduces a risk of error. Based on this observation, we reframe the problem of setting a reasoning budget as choosing an acceptable level of risk, an interpretable quantity that directly interfaces with downstream decision-making pipelines. We utilize an external validation set and distribution-free risk control framework (Bates et al., 2021; Jazbec et al., 2024) to automatically map a user-specified risk to the corresponding criteria for terminating the reasoning chain.

Specifically, we delineate two complementary types of risks and their corresponding controlling mechanisms (illustrated in Fig. 2): False positive risk of thinking the model has the correct answer, controlled by an upper threshold of confidence; False negative risk of thinking the current (and future) answers will be incorrect, controlled by the lower threshold, a novel mechanism that measures whether the reasoning is making enough progress. These two types of risks and thresholds are related to different sources of inefficiency: The upper threshold reduces wasted tokens after the model has effectively converged (Eq. (8)), while the lower threshold avoids spending tokens when further reasoning is unlikely to help (Eq. (9)).

In summary, our contributions are: (i) We introduce a collection of loss functions that capture different sources of inefficiency and errors from early stopping, enabling incorporation of distribution-free risk control into reasoning LLMs, a principled approach that allows early stopping (Sec. 4.1); (ii) We introduce a novel parametric lower threshold that halts the reasoning when the model is not progressing sufficiently at decreasing uncertainty (Sec. 4.2); (iii) We demonstrate that at the same risk level, different approaches exhibit different efficiency, whereas using our upper threshold plus our proposed parametric lower threshold consistently yields efficiency gains (Sec. 5.3).
