Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used in consequential applications. Despite their
versatility, LLMs often produce hallucinations, in which the generated information is inaccurate
or fabricated and require costly retraining to integrate new knowledge. One promising method to
mitigate these problems is retrieval-augmented generation (RAG, Lewis et al., 2020). RAG enhances
text generation by adding information from external knowledge sources to the prompt and has been
shown to reduce hallucinations in practice (Shuster et al., 2021). Nevertheless, even when modern
LLMs are used with RAG, hallucination rates of 15% – 30% (Chen et al., 2023a) or more than one
hallucination per 100 output tokens can occur (Niu et al., 2024).
To prevent hallucinated output from being delivered to end-users, natural language inference (NLI)
models can be used to verify the grounding of the generated output in the documents retrieved (Chen
et al., 2023b; Es et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024) before the output is relayed to the end-user: the generated response must be fully grounded in the documents (see Figure 1); otherwise, it is considered ungrounded. However, our results indicate that their performance in verifying grounding for
realistic RAG inputs lags behind LLMs by about 20% (in ROC-AUC scores). Other recent methods
use pre- and post-processesing techniques such as sentence tokenization or LLM prompting to
decompose long prompts (Zha et al., 2023; Es et al., 2024) into several chunks or facts. Each of
these chunks needs to be processed in a separate forward pass, resulting in high latency as well.
While some studies (e.g., Manakul et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024) have also explored directly using
LLMs like GPT-4 for text entailment detection, their latency is about an order of magnitude above
the lightweight models. Taken together, these characteristics make it hard to deploy the existing
approaches in real-time industry use-cases.
The performance gap observed for realistic RAG inputs with the lightweight models may point to a
substantial domain mismatch between the NLI datasets used to train these models and the challenging, real-world data encountered at test time. We observe that inputs of NLI models in RAG are more
challenging as they comprise longer segments with multiple statements and contain more subtle ungrounded information as the output is LLM-generated. While these characteristics are common to
RAG systems in general, each implementation still has a very individual input distribution: First,
inputs may follow a specific format due to the RAG prompt template e.g., question: <question>.
evidence: Passage 1 <evidence1>, Passage 2 <evidence2> .... Second, the documents are retrieved
from knowledge bases from a variety of different domains, which may not be represented in training
data. Prior work (Williams et al., 2018) confirms difficulties when NLI models are applied to data
from an unseen domain and Hosseini et al. (2024) shows a generalization gap of up to 20%. This
suggests that NLI models need to be adapted to their target domain for optimal performance.
Bridging this domain gap poses a significant challenge due to the inherent difficulty of adapting
models to unseen domains that is further amplified by the prohibitive costs of obtaining labeled data
from the target domain. This prevents supervised domain adaptation, e.g., through fine-tuning on
target domain data. To address this issue, we propose Automatic Generative Domain Adaptation
(Auto-GDA). Our unsupervised domain adaptation framework produces high-quality synthetic data,
which is then used to fine-tune a lightweight NLI model, adapting it to a specific domain of RAG
inputs. While training data generation by simply prompting LLMs has been repeatedly explored
in the literature (e.g., Saad-Falcon et al., 2024; Hosseini et al., 2024), data quality might be further improved through filtering and incorporating background knowledge through label-preserving
data augmentation strategies, such as round-trip translation (Chen et al., 2023b). However, specifying good filters and heuristic augmentation strategies require significant manual effort. As data
augmentations can further be applied iteratively, the space of potential samples grows exponentially,
necessitating efficient search strategies. During this offline training phase, less efficient teacher models can provide additional guidance using weak labels. Auto-GDA offers a unified way to leverage
all these available tools. We thus make the following contributions:

1. We formalize the unsupervised domain adaptation problem under the availability of practical tools such as data generators, data augmentation routines, and weak teacher models.
2. We propose Automatic Generative Domain Adaptation (Auto-GDA), a principled framework for unsupervised domain adaptation through synthetic data that can be instantiated
with different implementations of generation, augmentation, and weak labeling steps and
which automatically selects high-quality samples.
3. We show that our objective corresponds to an enhanced distribution matching objective but
is highly efficient to optimize. w
4. Our experiments on realistic RAG inputs highlight that our fine-tuned models using AutoGDA (1) often outperform their weak teacher models (2) perform almost as well as reference models fine-tuned with human-labeled data and (3) reach the level of performance
exhibited by LLMs while having almost 10x lower latency. (4) Our method further outperforms more classical training-based unsupervised domain adaptation techniques.1