Imitation learning provides an intuitive policy optimization framework for executing complex
robotic tasks by learning from expert demonstrations (Hussein et al., 2017). However, naively replicating expert behavior can raise safety concerns during deployment, as the robot’s trajectory may
become unreliable when facing out-of-sample (OOS) states. For instance, if the robot begins from
an unknown initial state or encounters environmental perturbations, it could fail to maintain a consistent and reliable behavior. To address this issue, the policy can be modeled using a dynamical
system (DS) with rigorous reliability certificates (Ravichandar et al., 2020; Dawson et al., 2023).
One such certificate is asymptotic stability (Devaney,
2021), which ensures that all trajectories eventually converge to the same equilibrium state, regardless of
the initial condition or perturbations (Khansari-Zadeh &
Billard, 2011; Rana et al., 2020; Abyaneh et al., 2024).
While asymptotic stability guarantees convergence, it overlooks the transient behavior (Tsukamoto et al., 2021).
This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 1 for an arbitrary
OOS initial state, where the trajectory induced by the stable policy converges to the target but fails to imitate the
expert. In contrast, contractive DS policies ensure that the resulting trajectories exponentially converge to each
other, and ultimately to the equilibrium state (Ravichandar et al., 2017; Mohammadi et al., 2024). We leverage
the stronger notion of contractivity (Lohmiller & Slotine,
1998) to ensure reliability in the transient phase, and as a result, enhance the imitation quality.
There are two main approaches to learning contractive
DSs. The most common method relies on constrained optimization to train the DS while satisfying learned or fixed contractivity certificates (Ravichandar
et al., 2017; Blocher et al., 2017; Sindhwani et al., 2018). However, constrained optimization is
computationally challenging for complex expert behaviors or high-dimensional state spaces. Additionally, most constrained approaches trade off imitation accuracy for constraint satisfaction. The
second approach is based on parameterized models with built-in contractivity guarantees for any
choice of parameters (Mohammadi et al., 2024; Dawson et al., 2023). As a result, the model remains contractive even if the learning process is imperfect or disrupted.
In this work, we build on the foundation of two such formulations: (i) a parameterization of contractive continuous-time DSs using recurrent equilibrium networks (RENs) (Martinelli et al., 2023),
and (ii) the coupling layer architecture (Papamakarios et al., 2021). The former ensures that the DS
is contractive with an adjustable rate, while the latter provides a trainable bijective transformation
that preserves contraction properties. Our experiments demonstrate that the coupling layers enhance
the model’s representation power, leading to improved imitation accuracy and faster training, while
maintaining the contractive nature of the DS.
Related work. Contractive imitation learning approaches are less common in the literature, primarily due to the increased difficulty of enforcing contractivity compared to asymptotic stability.
The majority of existing methods train the DS under contractivity constraints (Blocher et al., 2017;
Ravichandar et al., 2017; Sindhwani et al., 2018), resulting in a computationally demanding optimization problem. These methods assume specific representations of the DS or the contraction
certificate to mitigate the intensive computation. For example, Ravichandar et al. (2017) employ
sum-of-squares programming with polynomials, while Blocher et al. (2017) and Ravichandar et al.
(2017) use Gaussian mixture techniques. Additionally, Sindhwani et al. (2018) adopt reproducing
kernel Hilbert spaces. By focusing on these particular representations, these methods reduce the
computational cost, but at the cost of limiting the model’s representation power.
More recently, Mohammadi et al. (2024) introduce a promising unconstrained neural architecture
with inherent contractivity guarantees. The algorithm optimizes a parameterized negative-definite
Jacobian in a lower-dimensional latent space and integrates it to derive the DS. Despite better performance in some high-dimensional environments, it under-performs in lower-dimensional ones. The
method also requires solving a second-order differential equation, which is more complex than the
standard first-order equations typically used (Rana et al., 2020; Sochopoulos et al., 2024). Further
discussion of the literature, including non-contractive methods, is provided in App. B.
Contributions. We propose a State-only framework for learning Contractive Dynamical System
policies (SCDS), which offers several distinct advantages. First, SCDS learns the policy solely from
state measurements, eliminating the need to measure the expert’s velocity. Hence, we address the
cumulative error problem observed in previous methods that replicate expert velocity, where small
errors can accumulate and lead to significant deviations in state space trajectories (Ravichandar
et al., 2020; Abyaneh et al., 2024). Additionally, SCDS enables learning in a latent space, with its
dimension adapting to the problem at hand. It facilitates learning in high-dimensional state spaces
by mapping to lower-dimensional latent representations, while also providing flexibility in lowdimensional spaces through higher-dimensional embeddings.
From a theoretical standpoint, we provide a rigorous solution for OOS recovery by establishing an
upper bound on the worst-case deviation from expert trajectories. SCDS also offers control over the
transient behavior through an adjustable and learnable contraction rate. Training SCDS is highly
efficient by relying on unconstrained optimization and neural ordinary differential equations (ODE)
fixed-point differentiation for gradient computation (Chen et al., 2018). An overview of SCDS is
outlined in Fig. 2.