Long-context large language models (LLMs) are designed to handle extended input sequences,
enabling them to process and understand longer context (e.g., Gemini 1.5 Pro with up to 2M
tokens) (Achiam et al., 2023; Reid et al., 2024; Team et al., 2023). Combined with increased inference
computation, long-context LLMs demonstrate improved performance across various downstream
tasks (Agarwal et al.; Snell et al., 2024). For example, many-shot in-context learning (ICL) can match
the performance of supervised fine-tuning by providing extensive in-context examples (Bertsch et al.,
2024). Particularly for knowledge-intensive tasks that leverage retrieval augmented generation (RAG),
increasing the quantity or size of retrieved documents up to a certain threshold consistently enhances
the performance (Jiang et al., 2024; Ram et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024).
Previous studies on inference scaling for RAG focus on expanding the retrieved knowledge by
increasing the number or lengths of retrieved documents (Jiang et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024; Xu et al.,
2024). However, only emphasizing on the knowledge quantity without providing further guidance
presents certain limitations. On one hand, current long-context LLMs still have limited ability to
effectively locate relevant information in ultra-long sequences upon challenging tasks (Kuratov et al.,
2024; Li et al., 2024). For instance, the optimal performance of long-context LLMs is often achieved
without fully utilizing the maximum length (Agarwal et al.). On the other hand, numerous studies
show that retrieving over soft thresholds (e.g., top-10 documents) leads to a performance plateau and
may even cause declines (Kuratov et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024a; Ram et al., 2023). Such performance
drops may be traced back to the increased noise within context, which causes distraction and adversely
affects generation (Leng et al., 2024; Yoran et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). As a result, inference
scaling of long-context RAG remains challenging for existing methods.
In this work, we leverage a broader range of strategies to comprehensively explore how RAG
benefits from the scaling of inference computation. A straightforward strategy is demonstration-based
RAG (DRAG), where multiple RAG examples are provided as demonstrations to utilize the long-context
capabilities of LLMs (Brown et al., 2020). DRAG allows models to learn (in-context) how to locate
relevant information and apply it to response generation1 . Nevertheless, the quality of one-step
retrieval varies across tasks and often fails to provide sufficient information. Inspired by iterative
methods (Trivedi et al., 2023; Yoran et al., 2024), we develop iterative demonstration-based RAG
(IterDRAG). IterDRAG learns to decompose input queries into simpler sub-queries and answer them
using interleaved retrieval. By iteratively retrieving and generating upon sub-queries, LLMs construct
reasoning chains that bridge the compositionality gap for multi-hop queries. Together, these strategies
provide additional flexibility in scaling inference computation for RAG, allowing long-context LLMs
to more effectively address complex knowledge-intensive queries.
Building on these strategies, we investigate multiple ways to scale up inference computation.
Here, we measure computation by considering the total number of input tokens across all iterations,
referred to as the effective context length. In DRAG, scaling the effective context length can be done by
increasing two inference parameters: the number of retrieved documents and in-context examples.
In IterDRAG, test-time compute can be further extended by introducing additional generation steps.
Since different combinations of inference parameters result in varied allocations of computational
resources, our goal is to establish the relationship between RAG performance, different scales and
allocations of inference computation. Through extensive experiments on benchmark QA datasets,
we demonstrate an almost linear relationship between RAG performance and the scale of effective
context length by combining both RAG strategies, as shown in Figure 1 (right). Moreover, our RAG
strategies exhibit improved performance than merely scaling the number of documents, achieving
state-of-the-art performance with the compact Gemini 1.5 Flash (See evaluation in Figure 2).
Drawing from our observations, we examine the relationship between RAG performance and
inference computation, which we quantify as the inference scaling laws for RAG. These observed
inference scaling laws reveal that RAG performance consistently improves with the expansion of
the effective context length under optimal configurations. Consequently, we take a deeper dive into
modeling RAG performance with respect to various inference computation allocations. Our goal is
to predict the optimal set of inference parameters that maximize the performance across different
RAG tasks. To achieve this, we quantitatively model the relationship between RAG performance
and varying inference configurations with the computation allocation model for RAG. Using the
estimated computation allocation model, the optimal configurations can be empirically determined
and generalize well for various scenarios, thereby maximizing the utilization of the computation
budget. We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We systematically investigate inference scaling for long-context RAG, for which we introduce
two scaling strategies, DRAG and IterDRAG, to effectively scale inference compute.
• We comprehensively evaluate DRAG and IterDRAG, where they not only achieve state-of-the-art
performance, but also exhibit superior scaling properties compared to solely increasing the
quantity of documents.
• Through extensive experiments on benchmark QA datasets, we demonstrate that when test-time
compute is optimally allocated, long-context RAG performance can scale almost linearly with
the increasing order of magnitude of the computation budget.
• We quantitatively model the relationship between RAG performance and different inference
parameters, deriving the computation allocation model. This model aligns closely with our
experimental results and generalize well across scenarios, providing practical guidance for
optimal computation allocation in long-context RAG.