The capabilities of large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Dubey
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024) have significantly improved while learning from larger pre-training
datasets recently. Despite this, language models may respond to harmful queries, generating unsafe
and toxic content (Ousidhoum et al., 2021; Deshpande et al., 2023), raising concerns about potential
risks (Bengio et al., 2024). In sight of this, alignment (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a;b) is
employed to ensure LLM safety by aligning with human values, while existing research (Zou et al.,
2023b; Wei et al., 2024a; Carlini et al., 2024) suggests that malicious attackers can circumvent safety
guardrails. Therefore, understanding the inner workings of LLMs is necessary for responsible and
ethical development (Zhao et al., 2024a; Bereska & Gavves, 2024; Fang et al., 2024).
Currently, revealing the black-box LLM safety is typically achieved through mechanism interpretation methods. Specifically, these methods (Geiger et al., 2021; Stolfo et al., 2023; Gurnee et al.,
2023) granularly analyze features, neurons, layers, and parameters to assist humans in understanding model behavior and capabilities. Recent studies (Zou et al., 2023a; Templeton, 2024; Arditi
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024) indicate that the safety capability can be attributed to representations
and neurons. However, multi-head attention, which is confirmed to be crucial in other abilities (Vig,
2019; Gould et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024), has received less attention in safety interpretability. Due to
the differing specificities of components and representations, directly transferring existing methods
to safety attention attribution is challenging. Additionally, some general approaches (Meng et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023; Zhang & Nanda, 2024) typically involve special tasks to observe the result
changes in one forward, whereas safety tasks necessitate full generation across multiple forwards.
In this paper, we aim to interpret safety capability within multi-head attention. To achieve this, we
introduce Safety Head ImPortant Scores (Ships) to attribute the safety capability of individual
attention heads in an aligned model. The model is trained to reject harmful queries in a high probability so that it aligns with human values (Ganguli et al., 2022; Dubey et al., 2024). Based on this,
Ships quantifies the impact of each attention head on the change in the rejection probability of
harmful queries through causal tracing. Concretely, we demonstrate that Ships can be used for
attributing safety attention head. Experimental results show that on three harmful query datasets,
using Ships to identify safe heads and using undifferentiated attention ablation (only modifying
∼ 0.006% of the parameters) can improve the attack success rate (ASR) of Llama-2-7b-chat
from 0.04 to 0.64 ↑ and Vicuna-7b-v1.5 from 0.27 to 0.55 ↑.
Furthermore, to attribute generalized safety attention heads, we generalize Ships to evaluate the
changes in the representation of ablating attention heads on harmful query datasets. Based on the
generalized version of Ships, we attribute the most important safety attention head, which is ablated, and the ASR is improved to 0.72 ↑. Iteratively selecting important heads results in a group
of heads that can significantly change the rejection representation. We name this heuristic method
Safety Attention Head AttRibution Algorithm (Sahara). Experimental results show that ablating
the attention head group can further weaken the safety capability collaboratively.
Based on the Ships and Sahara, we interpret the safety head of attention on several popular
LLMs, such as Llama-2-7b-chat and Vicuna-7b-v1.5. This interpretation yields several
intriguing insights: 1. Certain safety heads within the attention mechanism are crucial for feature
integration in safety tasks. Specifically, modifying the value of the attention weight matrices changes
the model output significantly, while scaling the attention output does not; 2. For LLMs fine-tuned
from the same base model, their safety heads have overlap, indicating that in addition to alignment,
the safety impact of the base model is critical; 3. The attention heads that affect safety can act
independently with affecting helpfulness little. These insights provide a new perspective on LLM
safety and provide a solid basis for the enhancement and future optimization of safety alignment.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
➪ We make a pioneering effort to discover and prove the existence of safety-specific attention
heads in LLMs, which complements the research on safety interpretability.

➪ We present Ships to evaluate the safety impact of attention head ablation. Then, we propose a
heuristic algorithm Sahara to find head groups whose ablation leads to safety degradation.
➪ We comprehensively analyze the importance of the standard multi-head attention mechanism
for LLM safety, providing intriguing insights based on extensive experiments. Our work significantly boosts transparency and alleviates concerns regarding LLM risks.