1. Introduction

The rapidly increasing capabilities and widespread adoption of large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023b) have sparked various discussions about their potential impacts on society. An area of particular interest has been the privacy implications of LLMs, where initial investigations focused primarily on the memorization of model training data (Carlini et al., 2021; 2023). Recently, it has been shown that modern LLMs can be misused for high-accuracy predictions of personal attributes from seemingly non-revealing online posts (Staab et al., 2023). Moreover, where previously one would have to hire humans to infer private attributes, these models are fast and cheap enough to automate such inferences at scale. Concurrently, as users are unaware of such issues, they continue to share texts with information easily inferrable by LLMs. Rather concerningly, prior work has also shown that current industry-standard text anonymizers are largely insufficient at protecting users from such attacks, as they are unable to pick up on revealing yet complex and context-dependent cues. Consider the following shortened example from Staab et al. (2023):

This left shark thing is hilarious, I've seen it, walked just by there to see it live after my final exams.

While the comment contains no direct references to any locations, the context allows both an informed reader and an LLM to infer that the author lived in Glendale, where the 2015 Super Bowl halftime show featured a performance colloquially called "left shark incident." It would thus be desirable if the user could be warned before posting the comment that it might reveal their location and, ideally, be offered a less revealing alternative. Yet, anonymizing this text with existing tools proves futile, as no location was directly mentioned, fooling traditional entity-recognition-based anonymizers. This is particularly alarming as there have already been reports of LLM inferences being commercially applied online to categorize users based on their posts (Brewster, 2023).

The Need for Privacy. At the same time, there has been a large regulatory push for stronger individual privacy protection. Notably, regulations such as the EU's GDPR (EU, 2016) and California's CCPA (Cal, 2018) have established extensive legislative requirements to protect individuals' private data, such as location, age, and sex. Complementing regulatory efforts, online users, e.g., on pseudonymized sites like Reddit, are also increasingly aware of the need to protect their privacy and demand tighter governance over their personal data.

Insufficiency of Current Tools. Industry-standard tools such as Presidio (Mic, 2021) or Microsoft Azure Language Services (Aahill, 2023) that mainly remove structured information, such as SSIDs or mail addresses, are especially problematic in this setting as they (1) fall short of meeting the regulatory requirements of text anonymization (Pilan et al., 2022) and (2) indiscriminately mask any information matching specific patterns, often resulting in hardly readable texts—an issue especially grieving for the short, informal, and fast-flowing nature of online comments.

As such, despite expanding regulatory protection, the gap between increasingly stronger adversaries and lacking anonymization methods leaves users in a particularly vulnerable position.

This Work. We aim to bridge the gap between the increasing threat to user privacy in online texts and the lack of viable anonymization techniques against LLM-based inferences. In particular, we propose a new framework, shown in Fig. 1, that anonymizes texts using a feedback-guided adversarial approach. The key insight of this framework is to leverage the strong attribute inference capabilities of LLMs to inform a separate anonymizer language model. Over multiple rounds, we first employ an LLM adversary for a detailed private attribute inference from the given text. Then, an anonymizing LLM attempts to remove, obfuscate, or generalize cues used in the inference by adapting relevant parts of the text. In our evaluation on both real-world and synthetic online texts, we find that performing multiple iterations of this adversarial feedback loop leads to increasingly anonymized text while consistently outperforming traditional techniques in resulting text quality and privacy. Notably, even smaller locally deployed LLMs outperform commercial industry-grade anonymizers.

Main contributions. Our main contributions are:

- A novel characterization and formulation of the problem of anonymization under adversarial LLM attribute inference, overcoming the pitfalls of existing anonymization evaluation.
- A novel adversarial anonymization framework leveraging LLMs inferential capabilities.
- Extensive experimental evaluation on 13 LLMs and several baselines, including a human study, showing on both real-world and synthetic online texts that our adversarial framework outperforms state-of-the-art commercial anonymizers both in terms of utility and privacy.
