Accurate, interpretable, and unbiased probabilistic estimation is crucial to artificial intelligence (AI)
systems in mission-critical tasks that require trustworthy decision making. This is because, in many
real-world applications, AI systems have to work with partial and incomplete observations that are
insufficient for deductive and deterministic decisions (McCarthy & Hayes, 1981). Consider the
charging station planning scenario in Fig. 1, where we want to use large language models to decide
where to build a certain number of charging stations over a region, subject to some constraints. Since
we cannot always observe all the necessary information regarding a potential location, we can only
provide probability or confidence estimates on whether we should use the candidate location. If
the number of planned stations is significant, we need to perform an optimization process such as
ILP (Roth & Yih, 2005) that maximizes the estimated probabilities of each individual station. A
simple ranking of the candidates would not be sufficient in this scenario, as it may yield a suboptimal
solution illustrated in Fig. 1. However, current LLMs are not ideal for such probability estimation
tasks since 1) LLMs tend to be inaccurate and overconfident when estimating numerical confidences
and probabilities (Xiong et al., 2024) and 2) they cannot provide an out-of-the-box interpretable and
controllable process on how their estimates are derived (Li et al., 2024). This prevents us from using
LLMs’ decision-making capabilities in large-scale automatic decision-making tasks. Consequently,
there is a need to find ways to infer better probabilities from these models.
In this work, we propose B IRD (Bayesian Inference from Abduction and Deduction). B IRD builds on
three observations. The first observation is that although LLMs cannot produce convincing numerical
probabilities directly, they can generate neutral and comprehensive real-world factors relevant to
these probabilistic estimates. Moreover, we observe that they can make relatively correct coarse
probability estimations when using these factors as contexts that provide more complete information.
The last observation is that LLMs can decide how specific contexts and conditions are related to
these factors via entailment classifications. Together, these observations motivate B IRD, where we
approximate a Bayesian network (Friedman et al., 1997) using LLM-generated factors, optimize its
internal conditional probabilities by sampling LLM coarse predictions on combinations of values of
all the factors, and infer more accurate probabilities for specific downstream conditions by leveraging
LLMs to map conditions to factors.

As illustrated in Fig.2, we formulate the probability estimation problem as deciding P(Oi |C), where
Oi is a potential outcome (e.g., the government should/should not build a charging station here)
and C is the downstream condition or context (e.g., the location is on a busy highway) under a
decision-making scenario S (e.g., deciding whether to build a charging station at the location). Given
S, B IRD first generates a comprehensive set of real-world factors and values f1 , f2 , ..., fn that may
contribute to the probabilistic estimations. Then, it approximates a Bayesian network structure
using the generated factors and the outcomes {O}. We propose a novel method for estimating the
conditional probability table (CPT) for the outcome, i.e., P(Oi |f ), f ∈ F where F is the product
space of value sets for all factors.1 Specifically, we assume a set of learnable parameters P(Oi |fj )
representing the conditional probability of each possible outcome given a single variable fj . We
then sample f ∈ F and acquire LLM’s coarse probability estimations PLLM (Oi |f ). Next, we
approximate the conditional probability Pestimated (Oi |f ) in the CPT using the learnable parameters
P(Oi |fj ) based on a derived approximation formula and optimize these parameters by minimizing
the distributional distance between Pestimated (Oi |f ) and the LLM’s coarse predicted probability
PLLM (Oi |f ). From a high level, this abduction step aligns language models’ internal probability
estimation with Bayesian constraints and has better error tolerance. The resulting Bayesian network
is generic to all possible conditions in the scenario S. In the following deduction step, we use the
trained Bayesian parameters to estimate the probability of any possible conditions and observations
P(Oi |C). To do this, we employ an entailment process to determine P(f
i |C), as shown by “LLM
P
Entailment” in Fig. 2, and the outcome we are interested in, P(Oi |C) = f ∈F P(Oi |f )P(f |C).
As we show in §4, the inferred probabilities from B IRD are more reliable, consistent with human
judgments on 30% more instances than those directly predicted by LLMs. We further show that B IRD
probability predictions are good enough to be directly used for decision making (i.e., by computing an
argmax on the predicted probabilities of each label for inference), outperforming standard chain-ofthought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) on several reasoning benchmarks. More importantly, B IRD achieves
better probability estimations by optimizing an interpretable Bayesian network with natural-languagebased variables. There are two additional benefits of B IRD. First, we show that B IRD-aligned
probabilities can serve as more accurate and fine-grained supervision signals for training smaller
models. In addition, we demonstrate that B IRD’s factor generation process is neutral and unbiased to
the specific conditions, so it can be used to generate better follow-up questions to improve decisionmaking confidence. Combining these findings, we show that B IRD improves trustworthiness — a
crucial ability for mission-critical applications such as medical chatbots, where we need reliable
decisions supported with enough evidence for high-confidence predictions.